there's a new store kicking around at
the moment claiming that the McDonald's
Corporation is on the edge of bankruptcy
or collapse or what-have-you
don't believe the hype the good news is
that people in China are more
warm-hearted than you might have
imagined people in China are capable of
being shocked and refusing to eat at
McDonald's because of a documentary they
saw on TV some footage from
slaughterhouses or meat processing
plants or both was shown on the TV in
China and apparently a lot of people
said forget it I don't want to eat it
Donald's anymore I don't want to get you
fresh anymore in this video I'm gonna
try to talk about a somewhat broader and
deeper issue of the profit motive and
how it shapes all of our lives or at
least my life in particular but I have a
quick word of thanks to close in the
greenhouse if it were not for clothes
and his own YouTube channel I would not
be aware of this story googling around
quickly I see there's been quite a lot
of irresponsible journalism about
declining profits from McDonald's the
McDonald's Corporation special credit
goes to the Guardian one of England's
worst newspapers with the best
reputation the card Ian gets a lot of
respect and they put out a lot of really
shoddy and misleading journalism so the
Guardian makes the headline that
McDonald's is at a 15% plunge in profits
and they conclude that this is because
people all around the world are becoming
much more interested in their health and
so the future of the McDonald's
Corporation is grim because of rising
health consciousness yeah well a lot of
people will read that article and will
want to believe it people will not be
skeptical you stop and look at the
numbers which is what the journalists
over the Guardian should have done if
they have a background of reading social
science statistics if they have a
background of reading
economic statistics what they would find
is that the slowdown in global sales for
McDonald's is less than 1% its 0.9
percent now you might say well that's
global and the globe includes places
like China and India where McDonald's
has very visible franchises what about
the numbers in the united states the
united states decline is only 1 point 7
percent now if you want to believe that
this reflects an explosion of a new
attitude towards health consciousness
good luck
the official analysis simply atributes
it to better competition there are some
other restaurants the united states that
are more popular than mcdonald's right
now and even so a decline of only 1.7
percent although that might be of
concern to executives at the McDonald's
Corporation to try some kind of
rebranding or something that does not
indicate the collapse of the McDonald's
brand or corporation in any way so what
has happened the big news that is
concealed in a lot of the Western
reporting on this is that there have
been scandals in the production of meat
that McDonald's makes use of in China so
there's been a sequence of food safety
scandals that have negatively impacted
McDonald's and another chain fast-food
chain called yum yum Corporation yum
Corporation is a parent company that
owns a number of other brands including
Kentucky Fried Chicken so South China
Morning Post among other things is
reporting now forty eight point one
percent of all of the mainland food
processing factories failed to meet
acceptable standards this is from an
auditing company that's based in Hong
Kong and is paid by the meat packing
industry to go in and inspect factories
slaughterhouses etc
on their own behalf so again this this
perception versus reality here there is
sort of a strange question of how people
construct ethical questions what
assumptions are left unstated if over 48
percent of factories are failing these
standards the problem is not that
they're feeling my standards the problem
is not even that they're failing
government standards or international
standards orientation standards these
are failing standards that are set by
members of the same industry who are
only motivated by profit they just want
to keep business going now they do want
to meet certain professional standards
certain standards of hygiene and safety
or what have you but this has nothing to
do with the welfare of animals there's
nothing to do with ecology there's
nothing even to do with the public good
you know what's best for the greatest
number of people in society it doesn't
even have to do with economic efficiency
which is another interesting question to
bring to bear on meat production this is
the history's own set of standards and
research being carried out and paid for
by the industry itself so you know from
that perspective 48% of these factories
are failing from my perspective I'm sure
100% of these factories are feeling my
perspective doesn't count
however in Asia the change has been more
dramatic and more interesting why
well back in 2012 there was a scandal
that impacted both young corporation and
McDonald's that involves chickens being
fed excessive amounts of antibiotics now
I'm vegan I don't buy native stuff I'm
eating this stuff I would prefer to see
this whole industry abolished or at
least marginalized greatly reduced in
scope
but I can recognize in terms of the
profit motive and the logic of meat
production of what's going on here that
it's completely inevitable that this
industry uses more and more antibiotics
you have a system of chickens living in
urban densities some that were never
evolved to do chickens in nature do not
live like bees in a beehive disease
breaks out amongst the chickens the
owner of the farm wants to make money so
he gives them antibiotics maybe that
works for a short time but then it's not
working anymore so he gives them more
antibiotics you know you can draw up a
flowchart this is not shocking this is
completely predictable so what's
interesting the question is how is it
possible that from the public
perspective from the consumers
perspective that this is shocking what
was it they assumed did they imagine
that these chickens were running around
freely in a you know green field with
trees
what did they imagine was the situation
for these these chickens in the you know
industrialized agriculture industry I
don't know but obviously the gap here
the gap here is not between good and
evil the gap is just between perception
and reality good and evil is another
conversation really worth having but
that's not why people in 2012 suddenly
decided to stop eating at McDonald's in
China I wish that it were but it just
ain't so so there's a more recent
scandal 2014 a TV report emerged showing
workers picking up meat from a factory
floor as well as mixing meat that had
gone past its expiration date
with fresh meat okay completely
inevitable alright with the same caveat
that I'm not making excuses for the
meatpacking industry I just see the
logic of if you're working
in a factory where you cut up corpses
into pieces why would you regard a
people a piece of meat falls off the
conveyor belt and you pick it up and put
it back on the conveyor belt why not for
one thing you have the profit motive you
make more money if you do it for another
thing you don't necessarily have the
delusion that the bacteria on the floor
are more harmful than the bacteria that
are already found inside the rotting
corpse of an animal and animals running
corpse contains blood contains mucus
contingency horrible bacteria and
sources and causes of disease also
contains poo for lack of a better word
and you know the feces from animals both
passing through the digestive system and
the animals are covered with when
they're brought in misery to the
slaughterhouse it is a source of
contamination in me so yeah
this what's amazing to me is that people
in China saw a videotape of this and
they found it shocking they thought this
what's unacceptable and they decided in
large numbers to stop eating at
McDonald's in Kentucky Fried Chicken
that this was worse than what they
imagined the standards were for
slaughterhouses and meat processing pet
plants in China so what did they imagine
I can remember living in Hong Kong one
of the brands of milk that were on the
store shows there was called Kowloon
dairy now just even that name Kowloon
dairy it's as surreal as saying
Manhattan dairy Kowloon is a very
densely populated part of Hong Kong
every inch of it is covered with
concrete with high-density apartments
with tiny little shops there is
absolutely no room anywhere in Kowloon
for cows to be walking freely over green
grassy hills there's no way you can have
this the
in Hong Kong I mean if you want to know
the conditions of those cows and those
chickens you can see it but evidently
most people buying these things have
have some set of impossible fantasies
about the conditions of meat production
what I just read it doesn't shock me
does if if I were making the moral
compromise of eating meat at McDonald's
in China which is something I would
never do then the news I just read it
say that's no scandal sure the meat
falls in the floor pick it up off the
floor
put it back of the conveyor belt what do
you think what do you think happens in a
factory what do you you think the floor
is is any dirtier than the the corpse
they just hacked up and pull the stuff
out of give me a break and look I mean
the profit motive it distorts life for
us in so many strange ways and I can
remember working in a grocery store back
when I graduated from university the
first time around I remember in the
grocery store I got fired because I
report it in a totally helpful way in a
totally positive not B way that the
procedure they were following with their
coffee with whole being coffee was
inevitably resulting in rancid coffee
being served the customers because they
just were not separating old and new
coffee so what I was suggesting wouldn't
cost them any money it wouldn't cause
them any trouble it just basically was
setting up the drawers of coffee in a
way so that you moved forward the older
coffee and sold it first and didn't dump
in and mix together all the new coffee
beans it was a totally helpful
suggestion and my boss didn't want to
hear it and I was fired from working my
counter of a grocery store that's Canada
that's the that's the intensely
oppressive hierarchical culture of
Toronto Canada back when I was a kid
and that grocery store wouldn't make any
more money by mixing together a rancid
coffee with good coffee if you've got
money to make
mixing rancid beef with new beef it's
gonna happen my solution is torn
dony beef well figure it out so there's
good news there's bad news and there's
indifferent news coming out of this
particular flashpoint this peculiar
event that has put some light on
McDonald's and where your hamburgers
come from briefly the good news is that
people in China are more warm-hearted
than you might have imagined people in
China are capable of being shocked and
refusing to eat at McDonald's because of
a documentary they saw on TV some
footage from slaughterhouses or meat
processing plants or both was shown on
the TV in China and apparently a lot of
people said forget it
I don't want to eat it you thought owns
anymore I don't want you talking anymore
I've lived in China and I've lived
around Chinese people all my life I'm
delighted to hear that there is a public
there that's still sensitive to those
issues and it's still spotting in both
ways because believe me indifference to
animal suffering indifference to human
suffering is very real China so look the
fact that this is a scandal at all and
that it shows up in the economic records
at all is good news it's heartening the
bad news is look all of these reports
including the headline from The Guardian
the supposedly respectable Guardian that
McDonald's is teetering on the edge of
collapse
McDonald's is facing a short-term crisis
and profitability caused by a short-term
scandal in China
and the effects of most scandals are
indeed short-term it's very unlikely
this is going to change the world for
the better the profit motive and what it
does to people and then what those
people do to the environment is a riddle
that is gonna be with us forever
and we're always going to be coming up
to new solutions for it many seemingly
convincing social and political
philosophies fall apart on this point I
noticed that there are libertarians in
this world who have confidence that
human beings can operate sewage systems
at a profit show me an example of a
government anywhere in the world that
has for-profit corporations running the
sewers show me an example of a country
that has for-profit corporations running
prisons show me an example of a country
nuclear power plants all of these things
exists and any soberin detached study of
these things is gonna find guess what
there are some forms of business that
really cannot be handled by for-profit
companies that was the real lesson of
the meltdown at Fukushima Daiichi in
Japan there are many lessons to be
learned from that example but the profit
motive does not mix very well with the
type of public responsibility that is
entailed by operating a nuclear power
plant one of the great sources of
sadness for me in my life my
professional life was that I felt I was
separating myself from the rat race of
you know for-profit industries of the
profit motive by getting involved in
things like humanitarian work charity
work research in third-world countries
in Laos and Cambodia research that was
supposed to make the world a better
place and the sad reality is that just
like inside academia the profit motive
is still haunting you it's still
motivating and warping everything that's
going on around
you and you find this again and again
and just as I found back when I was
working at that grocery store or back
when I was working at Starbucks as a kid
I found that I was very different from
most of the other people around me that
I viewed the moral decisions being made
around me in a very fundamentally
different way than my colleagues when I
did research in Cambodia I was doing
research to make the world a better
place
for example I did research on the health
sector so I was not doing medical
research myself but I was doing research
on how health insurance worked how the
actual health system worked and we also
did evaluations of healthy how the
hospitals themselves were performing
that included things like the conditions
in the surgery room whether or not
doctors and nurses were washing their
hands research that does directly and
indirectly make a difference and you
know my attitude was I'm being paid
enough to do a good job I'm being paid
enough to do something positive my wage
was extremely low
I was not earning enough money to save
up and buy an airplane ticket back to
Canada to be quite honest my very modest
wage in Cambodia was enough to survive
in Cambodia however I was not being paid
enough to lie and cheat and steal or
harm people you'd have to pay me a lot
more for that you know the morality of
the job was what motivated me to take
the job in the first place and keep the
job and the immorality of the job the
compromises my employer was making the
immoral decisions might blur that was
the reason why I quit that job but look
there are many different types of people
in this world there are people who will
work in a meat processing plant and say
look you pay me enough to cut up this
corpse and make it into ground beef but
you don't pay me enough to poison people
you'd have to pay me more for me to
knowingly and intentionally mix together
rancid meat with good meat and poison
people
you'd ask pay me more for that it seems
that a very small percentage of people
feel that way when I was working at
Starbucks as a kid back during my first
year of university I was amazed that
with no profit motive
I had colleagues same age as myself
sometimes sometimes a few years older
who would quite willingly um you know
fake the best before dates on perishable
products in the fridge and poison people
that they would serve rancid product
instead of fresh product when they had
no profit motive they wouldn't make one
penny more they would just be slightly
lazier do slightly less work they would
do a bad job instead doing good job my
moral perspective on that was no I get
paid enough to pour coffee I get paid
enough to mop the floor to wash the
windows
that's all honest work cleaning the
toilet is honest work and you wash your
hands before and after I when I had that
job I felt good about doing all that I
wasn't being paid enough to poison
people I wasn't being paid to lie and
cheat and steal or to do something I
considered immoral when I was in
Cambodia doing that social science
research you know it was very sad for me
to realize that I was the only person on
the team who felt like I was being paid
enough to do legitimate research to
publish real numbers real statistics but
not to do fake research not to publish
fake numbers not to cover up and deceive
holes in the research or mislead the
client if you've got a client that's
paying you to go out and survey
hospitals in Cambodia and discover
what's wrong with them so that the
Cambodian government and so that
international donors charities can go
into those hospitals and fix the
problems so that there can be an
intervention to save lives if instead
you're going to take that clients money
and lie and cheat and deceive talk to
that research it's not the same as
killing people it's not the same as
poisoning people as a matter of
principle it's close and I got to say
for me in all those lines of work
whether I was doing research on Buddhism
research on the healthcare system even I
was working in museums I used to say to
people all the time
look if this were about money all of us
would be in real estate I mean none of
us are really making money here none of
I mean if real estate is cutthroat if
people are stabbing each other in the
back in the real estate industry I can
understand that because people do not by
and large go into real estate to make
the world a better place they're going
into real estate to make money and this
may shock you to learn but people are
not cutting the throats of cows and pigs
and chickens in order to make the world
a better place it's about money but for
me it's with great sadness that I had to
realize even when I was doing NGO work
even I was doing charity work even when
I was doing research of an historical
nature that would seem to in no way be
shaped by the profit motive man the
profit motive was there haunting me and
changed the behavior of all the other
cats around me